techdocs/win32.md, before:


# Heart Of Darkness (Windows) Technical Notes

![Amazing Logo](img/amazing_logo.png) ![HOD Logo](img/hod_logo.png)

Most of the information presented here was found by studying the binary code and data files.

- [Assets](#assets)
- [Compression](#compression)
- [Debug Mode](#debug-mode)
- [Engine](#engine)
- [Savegame](#savegame)
- [Resolution](#resolution)
- [Shadows Rendering](#shadows-rendering)
- [Screen Transform Effect](#screen-transform-effect)
- [Sprites Blitting](#sprites-blitting)


## Assets

There are three files for each level :

* .LVL : contains the palettes, bitmaps, sprites and pre-calculated tables for shadows
* .MST : contains the bytecode and triggers for the monster logic
* .SSS : contains the sound and triggers

SETUP.DAT contains data for the options, menus and the hint screens.

![Hint 3](img/hint03.png) ![Hint 6](img/hint06.png)

HOD.PAF ('Packed Animation File') contains the cinematics and the menu transitions.


## Compression

The engine uses two different compressions for graphics :

* RLE for graphics decoded at runtime (sprites)
* LZW for static bitmaps (menu, hints and level screen backgrounds)

Prepending a TIFF header to a LZW compressed data block allows to open the file in image editors, such as Gimp.

![Loading Gimp](img/loading_tiff_gimp.png)

Such programs indicate the compression is based on 'Old style LZW codes' (eg. the bitstream starts with a 0x100 clearcode).

[libtiff](https://gitlab.com/libtiff/libtiff) needs to be compiled with LZW_COMPAT to handle such files.

```
// libtiff/tif_lzw.c
#ifdef LZW_COMPAT
  if (!sp->dec_decode) {
    TIFFWarningExt(tif->tif_clientdata, module, "Old-style LZW codes, convert file");
```


## Debug Mode

Pressing the left or right shift key when loading the quit confirmation or a hint screen shows some statistics and debug information.

![Debug Mode](img/debug_mode.png)

The first line (Mem, Used, Free) indicates the status of the memory pool.

The second line lists the benchmark values for the harddrive, CDROM and CPU.

The third line indicates if the Hardrive (HD), CDROM (CD) or CPU are considered slow. LM is 1 if the system is low on memory. P is 1 if .paf animations are preloaded (before being played).

The last line gives information about the game progress. V is the version of the engine. P is the current level, S the current screen followed by the state (each screen can hold 4 different states). R is the last game checkpoint (restart ?). D is the difficulty and E the last error code.


## Engine

The engine code can be split in 4 major parts :

* native code handling collision, path finding, sprites, rendering and game objects
* native code for each level screen (callabcks)
* a bytecode interpreter (242 opcodes) for the monsters logic
* a bytecode interpreter (30 opcodes) for sounds


### Callbacks

For each level and screen, the below callbacks can be found in the executable.

```
// called before entering the screen
callLevel_preScreenUpdate(int screen)

// called to refresh the screen when it is current
callLevel_postScreenUpdate(int screen)

// called when starting the level from a checkpoint (setup objects)
callLevel_setupScreenCheckpoint(int screen)

// called at each engine tick
callLevel_tick()

// called when initializing and terminating the level (eg. play a cinematic)
callLevel_initialize()
callLevel_terminate()
```

These callbacks will usually :

* keep track of the user progress (checkpoints)
* update the background bitmap and state
* update sprites and game objects


As an example, the first screen of the 'rock' level has two different states. One before and another one after the explosion.

![rock_hod screen0](img/rock_hod_00_0.png) ![rock_hod screen1](img/rock_hod_00_1.png)

The callback code relies on some state and counter variables to change the asset for the background when Andy jumps.

```
void postScreenUpdateCb_rock_screen0() {
  if (_screens[0].state0 == 0) {
      // check for Andy jumping state
      if ((_andyObject->flags0 & 0x1F) == 0 && ((_andyObject->flags0 >> 5) & 7) == 6) {
          _screens[0].state0 = 2;
      }
  } else if (_screens[0].state0 == 2) {
    ++_screens[0].counter
    if (_screens[0].counter > 25) {
      _screens[0].s0 = 1
    }
    if (_screens[0].counter == 2) {
      shakeScreen(3, 12)
    }
  }
}
void preScreenUpdateCb_rock_screen0() {
  if (_screens[0].state0 == 0) {
    _screenBackground[0].currentId = 0
  } else {
    _screens[0].state0 = 1
    _screenBackground[0].currentId = 1
  }
}
```

### Monsters Logic

There is a bytecode interpreter for controlling the monsters in the game.
The interpreter can handle up to 64 concurrent tasks (coroutines).

The game state and coroutines can communicate via global vars (40), 32 bits flags or task local storage :

* each task has 8 integers of local storage ; var[7] holds a task identifier
* each coroutine can be associated to a monster
* each monster also has 8 integers of local storage ; var[7] holds the energy

Using C structures, this corresponds to :

```
uint32_t _flags;
int32_t  _vars[40];

struct Task {
  const uint8_t *bytecode;
  Monster *monster;
  int32_t vars[8];
  uint8_t flags;
  ...
} _tasks[64];

struct Monster {
  int32_t vars[8];
  ...
};
```

Each opcode is 32 bits long stored as little-endian.
The low byte contains the opcode number, parameters are stored in the upper 3 bytes.

The 242 opcodes can be divided in 6 categories :

* arithmetic on variables
* monsters state, behavior and path finding
* sprites
* general game triggers (hints display)
* tasks handling
* bytecode control flow (jmp)


### Sounds

The engine has a bytecode interpreter dedicated to the sounds.

The 30 opcodes can be divided in 3 categories :

* volume and panning modulation
* playback control (pause, resume, stop)
* bytecode control flow (jump)

Opcode | Name                            | Description
-------|---------------------------------|---------------------------------------
2      | addSound                        |
4      | removeSound                     |
5      | seekForward                     | seek to the PCM frame
6      | repeatGreaterEqual              |
8      | seekBackwardDelay               |
9      | modulatePanning                 | update sound panning value
10     | modulateVolume                  | update sound volume value
11     | setVolume                       | set sound volume value
12     | removeSounds                    | remove all matching sounds
13     | initVolumeModulation            | define steps and target volume
14     | initPanningModulation           | define steps and target panning
16     | resumeSound                     |
17     | pauseSound                      |
18     | decrementRepeat                 |
19     | setPanning                      | set sound panning value
20     | setPauseCounter                 |
21     | decrementDelay                  |
22     | setDelay                        |
23     | decrementVolumeModulationSteps  |
24     | setVolumeModulationSteps        |
25     | decrementPanningModulationSteps |
26     | setPanningModulationSteps       |
27     | seekBackward                    | seek to the PCM frame
28     | jump                            | jump to a given offset in the bytecode
29     | end                             |

Each opcode has variable length, from 4 to 16 bytes.


## Savegame

The engine does not allow saving the game state but tracks the last level and a restart point reached by the player.
This is saved in the setup.cfg file.

The file is 212 bytes long and contains the state for 4 different players :

* each player state block is 52 bytes long and stored consecutively
* at offset 209 : the current player index (0-3)
* at offset 211 : checksum ; a XOR of the previous 210 bytes

Data        | Field                       | Comment
------------|-----------------------------|--------
byte[10]    | Last level checkpoint reached | Used to display a thumbnail in the menu
byte        | Current level |
byte        | Current checkpoint for level |
uint32_t    | Bitmask of played cutscenes | Used to allow replay from the menu
uint32_t[4] | Joystick mapping |
byte[8]     | Keyboard mapping |
byte[8]     | Second Keyboard mapping |
byte        | Difficulty |
byte        | Stereo sound |
byte        | Sound volume |
byte        | Last level reached |

Integers are saved in little-endian.

## Resolution

The internal resolution of the game is 256x192 pixels, which likely dates back from the early years of development where the
DOS graphics card were limited to 256 colors in 320x200 resolution ('mode 0x13').

As the resolution would be too low for a game released in 1998, the engine creates a 640x480 window and upscale the
game screen buffer by two.

```
.text:004320E0    mov     eax, [esi+DirectXObjects.screen_display_h] # 640
.text:004320E6    mov     ecx, [esi+DirectXObjects.screen_display_w] # 480
.text:004320EC    sub     eax, 384
.text:004320F1    sub     ecx, 512
.text:004320F7    shr     eax, 1
.text:004320F9    imul    eax, [esi+DirectXObjects.screen_display_pitch]
.text:00432100    shr     ecx, 1
.text:00432102    add     eax, ecx
```

Nearest neighbor scaling is used for game graphics.
The x86 code packs two indexed pixels in one 32 bits register to optimize the copy.

```
.text:00432707    mov     al, [esi+1]
.text:0043270A    mov     bl, [esi+3]
.text:0043270D    mov     ah, al
.text:0043270F    mov     bh, bl
.text:00432711    shl     eax, 16
.text:00432714    shl     ebx, 16
.text:00432717    mov     al, [esi]
.text:00432719    mov     bl, [esi+2]
.text:0043271C    mov     ah, al
.text:0043271E    mov     bh, bl
.text:00432720    mov     [edi], eax
.text:00432722    mov     [edi+4], ebx
.text:00432725    mov     [ebp+0], eax
.text:00432728    mov     [ebp+4], ebx
```

The above block is repeated 64 * 192 times. In pseudo-code, this is equivalent to :

```
# input pixels : 0 1 2 3
eax = (esi[1] << 24) | (esi[1] << 16) | (esi[0] << 8) | esi[0]
// eax == 0 0 1 1
ebx = (esi[3] << 24) | (esi[3] << 16) | (esi[2] << 8) | esi[2]
// ebx == 2 2 3 3

# output pixels : 0 0 1 1 2 2 3 3
edi[0] = ebp[0] = eax
edi[4] = ebp[4] = ebx
// scanline0 == 0 0 1 1 2 2 3 3
// scanline1 == 0 0 1 1 2 2 3 3
```

Interestingly, while the most recent, the game has the smallest resolution when compared with other games developed by the same group of people :

* [Another World](http://www.mobygames.com/game/out-of-this-world) (1991) is 320x200 16 colors
* [Flashback](http://www.mobygames.com/game/flashback-the-quest-for-identity) (1992) is 256x224 256 colors


## Shadows Rendering

The engine keeps two buffers for rendering : one for the static background and another one where shadows are drawn.

![Screenshot Background Layer](img/screenshot-001-background.png) ![Screenshot Shadow Layer](img/screenshot-001-shadow.png)

For each screen in the game, the data files contains some precalculated table used to render the shadows.

Table            | Size                         | Comment
-----------------|------------------------------|--------
projectionData   | 256 * 192 * sizeof(uint16_t) | for a given (x, y) returns the casted (x, y)
paletteIndexData | 256                          | lookup the shadow color in current screen palette

With these two tables, drawing the shadows is simply achieved by passing the pixel palette indexes through these two LUTs.

```
for (i = 0; i < 256 * 192; ++i) {
  const int offset = projectionData[i]
  if (shadowLayer[offset] < 144) {
    frontLayer[i] = backgroundLayer[i]
  else {
    // shadow color, remap to game color
    frontLayer[i] = paletteIndexData[backgroundLayer[i]]
  }
}
```

![Screenshot Front Layer](img/screenshot-001-front.png)


## Screen Transform Effect

In some levels, the screen buffer is post processed to apply a water or heat effect to the game graphics.

The executable contains two 256x193 bitmaps, where each pixel intensity is used as an offset in the final buffer.

![Water Transform Data](img/data_43EA78.png) ![Fire Transform Data](img/data_43D960.png)

Transforming the game graphics screen is again done with a lookup table.
't' is a variable incremented on each frame, wrapping to 0 when equal to 256 (eg. the screen width).

```
for (y = 0; y < 192; ++y) {
  for (x = 0; x < 256; ++x) {
    tx = x + tdata[t]
    transformLayer[y * 256 + x] = frontLayer[y * 256 + tx]
    ++t
  }
}
```

![Level pwr1 screen 1](img/pwr1_hod_01_0.png) ![Level lava screen 5](img/lava_hod_05_0.png)


## Sprites Blitting

Similar to Flashback, the sprites are not cached in RAM but decompressed in realtime when drawn.

The RLE code byte uses the upper two bits for the operation type and the lower 6 bits for the length.

Type | Operation
-----|----------
0    | copy
1    | repeat
2    | transparent
3    | next line

Sprites can be vertically or horizontally flipped. The decoding routine also handles clipping, when a sprite is on a border of screen.

All these transformations are handled by the original engine using jumptables. The index is a mask representing the clipping and flipping to apply.

The first level of jumptables handles flipping and clipping.

```
.text:0042F82F   mov     cl, 3Fh
.text:0042F831   lodsb
.text:0042F832   and     cl, al
.text:0042F834   jmp     off_440C50[eax*4]
```

The second level of jumptables handles the RLE code itself.

Commit message:

techdocs: add C structures for assets

techdocs/win32.md, after:


# Heart Of Darkness (Windows) Technical Notes

![Amazing Logo](img/amazing_logo.png) ![HOD Logo](img/hod_logo.png)

Most of the information presented here was found by studying the binary code and data files.

- [Assets](#assets)
- [Compression](#compression)
- [Debug Mode](#debug-mode)
- [Engine](#engine)
- [Savegame](#savegame)
- [Resolution](#resolution)
- [Shadows Rendering](#shadows-rendering)
- [Screen Transform Effect](#screen-transform-effect)
- [Sprites Blitting](#sprites-blitting)


## Assets

The options, menus and hint screens are stored in SETUP.DAT.

![Hint 3](img/hint03.png) ![Hint 6](img/hint06.png)

Cinematics and menu transitions are stored in HOD.PAF ('Packed Animation File').

For each level, there are three files suffixed with 'HOD' :

* .LVL : contains palettes, bitmaps, sprites and pre-calculated tables for shadows
* .MST : contains bytecode and triggers for the monster logic
* .SSS : contains sounds (PCM), bytecode and triggers

Each file contains several C structures with pointers to binary data or other structures.

The loading code typically casts the memory buffer read from the disk to the C structure.
The pointer fields of the structure are then fixed in place. This is possible since the
size of pointer fits an uint32_t.

The same cannot be directly applied on more modern platforms with 64 bits processors.
Casting the structure would result in a different size. A recreation of the engine
targetting big-endian or 64 bits CPUs has to deserialize each structure field.

## Compression

The engine uses two different compressions for graphics :

* RLE for graphics decoded at runtime (sprites)
* LZW for static bitmaps (menu, hints and level screen backgrounds)

Prepending a TIFF header to a LZW compressed data block allows to open the file in image editors, such as Gimp.

![Loading Gimp](img/loading_tiff_gimp.png)

Such programs indicate the compression is based on 'Old style LZW codes' (eg. the bitstream starts with a 0x100 clearcode).

[libtiff](https://gitlab.com/libtiff/libtiff) needs to be compiled with LZW_COMPAT to handle such files.

```
// libtiff/tif_lzw.c
#ifdef LZW_COMPAT
  if (!sp->dec_decode) {
    TIFFWarningExt(tif->tif_clientdata, module, "Old-style LZW codes, convert file");
```


## Debug Mode

Pressing the left or right shift key when loading the quit confirmation or a hint screen shows some statistics and debug information.

![Debug Mode](img/debug_mode.png)

The first line (Mem, Used, Free) indicates the status of the memory pool.

The second line lists the benchmark values for the harddrive, CDROM and CPU.

The third line indicates if the Hardrive (HD), CDROM (CD) or CPU are considered slow. LM is 1 if the system is low on memory. P is 1 if .paf animations are preloaded (before being played).

The last line gives information about the game progress. V is the version of the engine. P is the current level, S the current screen followed by the state (each screen can hold 4 different states). R is the last game checkpoint (restart ?). D is the difficulty and E the last error code.


## Engine

The engine code can be split in 4 major parts :

* native code handling collision, path finding, sprites, rendering and game objects
* native code for each level screen (callabcks)
* a bytecode interpreter (242 opcodes) for the monsters logic
* a bytecode interpreter (30 opcodes) for sounds


### Callbacks

For each level and screen, the below callbacks can be found in the executable.

```
// called before entering the screen
callLevel_preScreenUpdate(int screen)

// called to refresh the screen when it is current
callLevel_postScreenUpdate(int screen)

// called when starting the level from a checkpoint (setup objects)
callLevel_setupScreenCheckpoint(int screen)

// called at each engine tick
callLevel_tick()

// called when initializing and terminating the level (eg. play a cinematic)
callLevel_initialize()
callLevel_terminate()
```

These callbacks will usually :

* keep track of the user progress (checkpoints)
* update the background bitmap and state
* update sprites and game objects


As an example, the first screen of the 'rock' level has two different states. One before and another one after the explosion.

![rock_hod screen0](img/rock_hod_00_0.png) ![rock_hod screen1](img/rock_hod_00_1.png)

The callback code relies on some state and counter variables to change the asset for the background when Andy jumps.

```
void postScreenUpdateCb_rock_screen0() {
  if (_screens[0].state0 == 0) {
      // check for Andy jumping state
      if ((_andyObject->flags0 & 0x1F) == 0 && ((_andyObject->flags0 >> 5) & 7) == 6) {
          _screens[0].state0 = 2;
      }
  } else if (_screens[0].state0 == 2) {
    ++_screens[0].counter
    if (_screens[0].counter > 25) {
      _screens[0].s0 = 1
    }
    if (_screens[0].counter == 2) {
      shakeScreen(3, 12)
    }
  }
}
void preScreenUpdateCb_rock_screen0() {
  if (_screens[0].state0 == 0) {
    _screenBackground[0].currentId = 0
  } else {
    _screens[0].state0 = 1
    _screenBackground[0].currentId = 1
  }
}
```

### Monsters Logic

There is a bytecode interpreter for controlling the monsters in the game.
The interpreter can handle up to 64 concurrent tasks (coroutines).

The game state and coroutines can communicate via global vars (40), 32 bits flags or task local storage :

* each task has 8 integers of local storage ; var[7] holds a task identifier
* each coroutine can be associated to a monster
* each monster also has 8 integers of local storage ; var[7] holds the energy

Using C structures, this corresponds to :

```
uint32_t _flags;
int32_t  _vars[40];

struct Task {
  const uint8_t *bytecode;
  Monster *monster;
  int32_t vars[8];
  uint8_t flags;
  ...
} _tasks[64];

struct Monster {
  int32_t vars[8];
  ...
};
```

Each opcode is 32 bits long stored as little-endian.
The low byte contains the opcode number, parameters are stored in the upper 3 bytes.

The 242 opcodes can be divided in 6 categories :

* arithmetic on variables
* monsters state, behavior and path finding
* sprites
* general game triggers (hints display)
* tasks handling
* bytecode control flow (jmp)


### Sounds

The engine has a bytecode interpreter dedicated to the sounds.

The 30 opcodes can be divided in 3 categories :

* volume and panning modulation
* playback control (pause, resume, stop)
* bytecode control flow (jump)

Opcode | Name                            | Description
-------|---------------------------------|---------------------------------------
2      | addSound                        |
4      | removeSound                     |
5      | seekForward                     | seek to the PCM frame
6      | repeatGreaterEqual              |
8      | seekBackwardDelay               |
9      | modulatePanning                 | update sound panning value
10     | modulateVolume                  | update sound volume value
11     | setVolume                       | set sound volume value
12     | removeSounds                    | remove all matching sounds
13     | initVolumeModulation            | define steps and target volume
14     | initPanningModulation           | define steps and target panning
16     | resumeSound                     |
17     | pauseSound                      |
18     | decrementRepeat                 |
19     | setPanning                      | set sound panning value
20     | setPauseCounter                 |
21     | decrementDelay                  |
22     | setDelay                        |
23     | decrementVolumeModulationSteps  |
24     | setVolumeModulationSteps        |
25     | decrementPanningModulationSteps |
26     | setPanningModulationSteps       |
27     | seekBackward                    | seek to the PCM frame
28     | jump                            | jump to a given offset in the bytecode
29     | end                             |

Each opcode has variable length, from 4 to 16 bytes.


## Savegame

The engine does not allow saving the game state but tracks the last level and a restart point reached by the player.
This is saved in the setup.cfg file.

The file is 212 bytes long and contains the state for 4 different players :

* each player state block is 52 bytes long and stored consecutively
* at offset 209 : the current player index (0-3)
* at offset 211 : checksum ; a XOR of the previous 210 bytes

Data        | Field                       | Comment
------------|-----------------------------|--------
byte[10]    | Last level checkpoint reached | Used to display a thumbnail in the menu
byte        | Current level |
byte        | Current checkpoint for level |
uint32_t    | Bitmask of played cutscenes | Used to allow replay from the menu
uint32_t[4] | Joystick mapping |
byte[8]     | Keyboard mapping |
byte[8]     | Second Keyboard mapping |
byte        | Difficulty |
byte        | Stereo sound |
byte        | Sound volume |
byte        | Last level reached |

Integers are saved in little-endian.

## Resolution

The internal resolution of the game is 256x192 pixels, which likely dates back from the early years of development where the
DOS graphics card were limited to 256 colors in 320x200 resolution ('mode 0x13').

As the resolution would be too low for a game released in 1998, the engine creates a 640x480 window and upscale the
game screen buffer by two.

```
.text:004320E0    mov     eax, [esi+DirectXObjects.screen_display_h] # 640
.text:004320E6    mov     ecx, [esi+DirectXObjects.screen_display_w] # 480
.text:004320EC    sub     eax, 384
.text:004320F1    sub     ecx, 512
.text:004320F7    shr     eax, 1
.text:004320F9    imul    eax, [esi+DirectXObjects.screen_display_pitch]
.text:00432100    shr     ecx, 1
.text:00432102    add     eax, ecx
```

Nearest neighbor scaling is used for game graphics.
The x86 code packs two indexed pixels in one 32 bits register to optimize the copy.

```
.text:00432707    mov     al, [esi+1]
.text:0043270A    mov     bl, [esi+3]
.text:0043270D    mov     ah, al
.text:0043270F    mov     bh, bl
.text:00432711    shl     eax, 16
.text:00432714    shl     ebx, 16
.text:00432717    mov     al, [esi]
.text:00432719    mov     bl, [esi+2]
.text:0043271C    mov     ah, al
.text:0043271E    mov     bh, bl
.text:00432720    mov     [edi], eax
.text:00432722    mov     [edi+4], ebx
.text:00432725    mov     [ebp+0], eax
.text:00432728    mov     [ebp+4], ebx
```

The above block is repeated 64 * 192 times. In pseudo-code, this is equivalent to :

```
# input pixels : 0 1 2 3
eax = (esi[1] << 24) | (esi[1] << 16) | (esi[0] << 8) | esi[0]
// eax == 0 0 1 1
ebx = (esi[3] << 24) | (esi[3] << 16) | (esi[2] << 8) | esi[2]
// ebx == 2 2 3 3

# output pixels : 0 0 1 1 2 2 3 3
edi[0] = ebp[0] = eax
edi[4] = ebp[4] = ebx
// scanline0 == 0 0 1 1 2 2 3 3
// scanline1 == 0 0 1 1 2 2 3 3
```

Interestingly, while the most recent, the game has the smallest resolution when compared with other games developed by the same group of people :

* [Another World](http://www.mobygames.com/game/out-of-this-world) (1991) is 320x200 16 colors
* [Flashback](http://www.mobygames.com/game/flashback-the-quest-for-identity) (1992) is 256x224 256 colors


## Shadows Rendering

The engine keeps two buffers for rendering : one for the static background and another one where shadows are drawn.

![Screenshot Background Layer](img/screenshot-001-background.png) ![Screenshot Shadow Layer](img/screenshot-001-shadow.png)

For each screen in the game, the data files contains some precalculated table used to render the shadows.

Table            | Size                         | Comment
-----------------|------------------------------|--------
projectionData   | 256 * 192 * sizeof(uint16_t) | for a given (x, y) returns the casted (x, y)
paletteIndexData | 256                          | lookup the shadow color in current screen palette

With these two tables, drawing the shadows is simply achieved by passing the pixel palette indexes through these two LUTs.

```
for (i = 0; i < 256 * 192; ++i) {
  const int offset = projectionData[i]
  if (shadowLayer[offset] < 144) {
    frontLayer[i] = backgroundLayer[i]
  else {
    // shadow color, remap to game color
    frontLayer[i] = paletteIndexData[backgroundLayer[i]]
  }
}
```

![Screenshot Front Layer](img/screenshot-001-front.png)


## Screen Transform Effect

In some levels, the screen buffer is post processed to apply a water or heat effect to the game graphics.

The executable contains two 256x193 bitmaps, where each pixel intensity is used as an offset in the final buffer.

![Water Transform Data](img/data_43EA78.png) ![Fire Transform Data](img/data_43D960.png)

Transforming the game graphics screen is again done with a lookup table.
't' is a variable incremented on each frame, wrapping to 0 when equal to 256 (eg. the screen width).

```
for (y = 0; y < 192; ++y) {
  for (x = 0; x < 256; ++x) {
    tx = x + tdata[t]
    transformLayer[y * 256 + x] = frontLayer[y * 256 + tx]
    ++t
  }
}
```

![Level pwr1 screen 1](img/pwr1_hod_01_0.png) ![Level lava screen 5](img/lava_hod_05_0.png)


## Sprites Blitting

Similar to Flashback, the sprites are not cached in RAM but decompressed in realtime when drawn.

The RLE code byte uses the upper two bits for the operation type and the lower 6 bits for the length.

Type | Operation
-----|----------
0    | copy
1    | repeat
2    | transparent
3    | next line

Sprites can be vertically or horizontally flipped. The decoding routine also handles clipping, when a sprite is on a border of screen.

All these transformations are handled by the original engine using jumptables. The index is a mask representing the clipping and flipping to apply.

The first level of jumptables handles flipping and clipping.

```
.text:0042F82F   mov     cl, 3Fh
.text:0042F831   lodsb
.text:0042F832   and     cl, al
.text:0042F834   jmp     off_440C50[eax*4]
```

The second level of jumptables handles the RLE code itself.
